chapters/abstraction.md, before:

# Abstraction / Modeling

```{warning}
Work in progress.
```

%- Methods, classes, types.
%- Implementation details.
%- Solve problems by composing (combining) abstractions rather than having to be bothered with all the nitty gritty all the time.
%- Analog examples:
%  - Electrical wall outlet. You don't need to know anything about voltage or amps to use them.
%  - Cars. You just fill them up and drive. Automatic transmission is a good example.
%- Section 4.3 in {cite:et}`ousterhout2018`.
%- Interfaces in the abstraction-sense of the word. In the input-output-how-to-interact-with sense of the word.
%- Modeling
%  - "Object thinking focuses our attention on the problem space rather than the solution space. Object thinkers take the advice of Plato, Parnas, Fred Brooks, Christopher Alexander, and many others by letting the problem define its own solution"
%  - [David West](https://maximilianocontieri.com/software-engineering-great-quotes)
%  - "Programming is not about typing, it's about thinking." [Rich Hickey](https://maximilianocontieri.com/software-engineering-great-quotes)
%  - Later we will talk about making impossible states impossible. Types over tests.
%    - "The one and only software design principle"
%    - "The bijection rule"
%    - https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/fundamentals/types/
%    - https://maximilianocontieri.com/the-one-and-only-software-design-principle
%

Commit message:

Write the chapter on abstract dependency injection.

chapters/abstraction.md, after:

# Abstraction / Modeling

```{warning}
Work in progress.
```

% If this chapter came after all the object composition and dependency injection chapters then we could discuss how we've focused on ciphers but how a more useful model probably is `StringTransformers`. Where ciphers is just one example where you can pair an Encoding transformer with a decoding transformer. This is a very interesting discussion.

%- Methods, classes, types.
%- Implementation details.
%- Solve problems by composing (combining) abstractions rather than having to be bothered with all the nitty gritty all the time.
%- Analog examples:
%  - Electrical wall outlet. You don't need to know anything about voltage or amps to use them.
%  - Cars. You just fill them up and drive. Automatic transmission is a good example.
%- Section 4.3 in {cite:et}`ousterhout2018`.
%- Interfaces in the abstraction-sense of the word. In the input-output-how-to-interact-with sense of the word.
%- Modeling
%  - "Object thinking focuses our attention on the problem space rather than the solution space. Object thinkers take the advice of Plato, Parnas, Fred Brooks, Christopher Alexander, and many others by letting the problem define its own solution"
%  - [David West](https://maximilianocontieri.com/software-engineering-great-quotes)
%  - "Programming is not about typing, it's about thinking." [Rich Hickey](https://maximilianocontieri.com/software-engineering-great-quotes)
%  - Later we will talk about making impossible states impossible. Types over tests.
%    - "The one and only software design principle"
%    - "The bijection rule"
%    - https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/fundamentals/types/
%    - https://maximilianocontieri.com/the-one-and-only-software-design-principle
%
