chapters/abstract-dependency-injection.md, before:

# Abstract dependency injection

```{warning}
Work in progress.
```



%- Principle: Depend on abstractions not on concretions.
%- In procedural programming abstract modules depend on concrete modules, but in object oriented programming abstract modules can depend on abstract modules.
%
%```{seealso}
%Dependency injection/inversion chapter.
%```

%```{exercise}
%Draw the [quadrant diagram of abstraction levels in object composition](composition-quadrants) and explain all four abstraction levels.
%Remember to give examples of each.
%```


%
%````{exercise}
%Write a program with three classes called `Speech`, `MultiSpeech`   has one class called `Animal` and one class called `Speech`.
%
%```
%        Animal
%==========================
%+ Animal (Speech speech);
%+ string Speak ();
%--------------------------
%
%
%        Speech
%==========================
%+ Speech (string sound);
%+ string Speak ();
%--------------------------
%```
%
%Using your classes, it should be possible to write the following program:
%
%```csharp
%Speech meow = new Speech("meow");
%Speech blub = new Speech("blub");
%Speech meowblub = new MultiSpeech(meow, blub);
%
%Animal cat = new Animal(meow);
%Animal fish = new Animal(blub);
%Animal catfish = new Animal(meowblub);
%
%Console.WriteLine( cat.Speak() );
%Console.WriteLine( fish.Speak() );
%Console.WriteLine( catfish.Speak() );
%```
%
%And if you run that program, you should get the following output:
%
%```output
%meow
%blub
%meow blub
%```
%````

% REMIND READER THAT THIS IS JUST RECURSION USING CLASSES.

Commit message:

Write chapter on Subtype polymorphism.

chapters/abstract-dependency-injection.md, after:

# Abstract dependency injection

```{warning}
Work in progress.
```



%- Principle: Depend on abstractions not on concretions.
%- In procedural programming abstract modules depend on concrete modules, but in object oriented programming abstract modules can depend on abstract modules.
%
%```{seealso}
%Dependency injection/inversion chapter.
%```


% FIRST REAL EXAMPLE MUST BE:
% Go back to RobbersStringCipher and RobbersChar cipher from concrete dependency injection chapter and show how RobbersStringCipher actually could be called CharwiseCipher since it literally has nothing to do with Robbers language if you introduce another interface that's called ICharCihper.


%```{exercise}
%Draw the [quadrant diagram of abstraction levels in object composition](composition-quadrants) and explain all four abstraction levels.
%Remember to give examples of each.
%```


%
%````{exercise}
%Write a program with three classes called `Speech`, `MultiSpeech`   has one class called `Animal` and one class called `Speech`.
%
%```
%        Animal
%==========================
%+ Animal (Speech speech);
%+ string Speak ();
%--------------------------
%
%
%        Speech
%==========================
%+ Speech (string sound);
%+ string Speak ();
%--------------------------
%```
%
%Using your classes, it should be possible to write the following program:
%
%```csharp
%Speech meow = new Speech("meow");
%Speech blub = new Speech("blub");
%Speech meowblub = new MultiSpeech(meow, blub);
%
%Animal cat = new Animal(meow);
%Animal fish = new Animal(blub);
%Animal catfish = new Animal(meowblub);
%
%Console.WriteLine( cat.Speak() );
%Console.WriteLine( fish.Speak() );
%Console.WriteLine( catfish.Speak() );
%```
%
%And if you run that program, you should get the following output:
%
%```output
%meow
%blub
%meow blub
%```
%````

% REMIND READER THAT THIS IS JUST RECURSION USING CLASSES.
