chapters/interfaces.md, before:

(interfaces)=
# Interfaces

The word "interface" is, in object oriented programming commonly used to mean two different but related things.

1. A contract or an abstraction.
2. A data type declared using the keyword `interface` present in many object oriented languages.

In this chapter we'll make a distinction between these two by either saying "interface" or `interface`.
Let's start with the abstract idea of an interface.
What is an interface?

%## The idea

```{important}
An interface defines *what* something can do without defining *how* it does it.
```

Remember how we've learned that a [class](classes) consists of a bunch of instance and static members?
Members are either methods or variables.
Then we have [properties](properties) which can be thought of somewhere in between methods and variables.

The set of all [public](access-modifiers) [instance members](classes) of a class are part of what we call the "interface" of a class.
An interface is a "contract" that tells us what we can do with something.
In other words, the set of all public members define *what* we can do with objects of the class.

Think of it like a standard.
If you've got a thing that adheres to some standard then you know how you can use that thing even if you don't know how the thing works "inside".
A power plug can be plugged into an outlet if they share the same standard.
We don't have to understand voltage, wattage, and amperage in order to use it.

If we've got an object and all we know is its interface then we know what methods we can call and what types to expect in return.
We know what variables we can access and what types they have.


## Motivation

Why is this a good idea?
What's the point?
Let's use an analogy.
Think about screws, bolts, and screwdrivers.
The drive type of the screw or bolt determines what screwdriver you need to screw or unscrew it.
The same screwdriver can however be used to drive a wide number of different types of screws and bolts.
Some fit into nuts, some are intended to penetrate material.
Some are left-handed and some are right-handed.
The same screwdriver can be used since different types of screws and bolts share the same drive type.

The drive type is what we would refer to as the "interface".
Think of it as a "standard".
It is the contract between the screw and the screwdriver.
Screw manufacturers make sure that their screw heads adhere to a standardized drive type.
Similarly, screwdriver manufacturers make sure that their screwdrivers adhere to a standardized drive type.

%```{figure} ../images/screws-nuts-and-screwdrivers.jpg
%:name: fig:screws-nuts-and-screwdrivers
%
%TODO.
%https://cribmode.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/screw-chart-jan042022-768x396.jpg.webp
%```

This separation between interface and implementation has immense benefits.
For one we don't have to buy a new screwdriver every time we buy a new screw.
In programming we refer to this as [reusability](reusability).
But also, it means that we don't have to coordinate between screw manufacturers, bolt manufacturers, and screwdrive manufacturers.
In programming we refer to this as [modifiability](modifiability).
We'll talk more about both reusability and modifiability in the chapter on [maintainability](maintainability).

%This is what we, in the chapter on maintainability, will refer to as "[reusability](reusability)".
%This is what we, in the chapter on maintainability, will refer to as "[modifiability](modifiability)".

```{exercise}
What is the abstract idea of an interface?
Come up with your own example in natural language that's different from the example given in this chapter on screws, bolts, and screwdrivers.
```


## Declaring an interface

An interface is often referred to as an "abstraction" while classes, in contrast, are referred to as "concretions".
Classes are concrete in the sense that they can be instantiated into objects.
Interfaces can however *not* be instantiated.

```{important}
A class defines a compile-time and a run-time type.
Interfaces *only define compile-time types* and cannot be instantiated.
```

In other words, an interface is only a compile-time type.
At run-time, any interface must be replaced by a run-time type.
Consider for example the following definition of a class called `Coordinate`:

```csharp
class Coordinate
{
  public int X { get; set; }
  public int Y { get; set; }

  public Coordinate (int x, int y)
  {
    X = x;
    Y = y;
  }

  public void Add (Coordinate coord)
  {
    X += coord.X;
  }

  public void Translate (int x, int y)
  {
    X += x;
    Y += y;
  }
}
```

What is the interface of the class `Coordinate`?
Well there are three public instance members:

1. The property `int X`.
2. The property `int Y`.
3. The instance method `void Translate (int x, int y)`.

These public instance members are what we would call the "interface" of the class.


%## The keyword

Even though we can talk about the abstract idea of the interface of the class `Coordinate`, we cannot talk about any concrete `interface` since it doesn't implement one.
What would a concrete `interface` that captures the same idea look like?
How about this:

```csharp
interface ICoordinate
{
  int X { get; set; }
  int Y { get; set; }
  void Translate (int x, int y);
}
```

```{note}
In C# the letter `I` is often prepended to the name of an interface.
So instead of naming an interface `Collection` we would name it `ICollection`.
This is purely a convention and serves no technical purpose.
Choose whether you want to stick to this convention or not and then stick to your decision within a code base.
```

Remember how we said that interfaces only define compile-time types and hence cannot be instantiated.
If we try to instantiate an interface we get an error.

```csharp
ICoordinate coord = new ICoordinate();
```

```output
error CS0144: Cannot create an instance of the abstract type or interface.
```

However, since interfaces do define compile-time types it is only the right-hand side of the assignment statement above that's problematic.
The left-hand side is entirely fine.
We can declare a variable of type `ICoordinate` and our code will compile just fine.

```csharp
ICoordinate coord;
```

```output
Build succeeded.
```

## Implementing an interface

But wait a minute you might say.
If I can declare a variable to be of type `ICoordinate` but there are no instances of `ICoordinate` how could this possibly be useful?
What can I put inside the variable?
Glad you asked.
We have now arrived at the magical destination know as [subtype polymorphism](subtype-polymorphism).
But let's finish up our discussion on interfaces before we dig too deep in that idea.

We cannot instantiate an `interface`, but we can declare that some concrete class or [abstract class](inheritance) (more on this later) *implements the interface*.
The key word here is "implements".
We say that some type implements some interface.

```{important}
A single type can implement multiple interfaces and the same interface can be implemented by multiple types.
```

To declare that a class implements an interface we use the colon (`:`) symbol after the name of the class in the class declaration and then specify the name of the interface.
When we compile our program the compiler will check whether our types actually implement all the members of the interfaces that they claim to implement.

In the example below we're defining an empty class called `Point` and claim that it implements the interface `ICoordinate`.
When compiling the program we get an error that states that we haven't implemented any of the members that `ICoordinate` demands.

```csharp
class Point : ICoordinate { }
```

```output
error CS0535: 'Point' does not implement interface member 'ICoordinate.X'.
error CS0535: 'Point' does not implement interface member 'ICoordinate.Y'.
error CS0535: 'Point' does not implement interface member 'ICoordinate.Translate(int, int)'.
```

But what about our previous class `Coordinate`.
Since we modeled the interface after that class, surely that class should be a valid implementation of `ICoordinate`.
Let's try it out.

```csharp
class Coordinate : ICoordinate
{
  // Insert same implementation as before...
}
```

```output
Build succeeded.
```

Yup, since the class `Coordinate` implements all the required members of the interface `ICoordinate` it is a valid implementation of it.
This means that we can now declare a variable with the compile-time type `ICoordinate` and run-time type `Coordinate` since the latter implements the interface of the former.

```csharp
ICoordinate coord = new Coordinate(0, 0);
```

Notice how the compile-time type on the left is an interface (or generally: an abstraction) while the run-time type on the right is a concrete class.
Why this is useful and what we can do with this is something that we'll deal with in the chapter on [subtype polymorphism](subtype-polymorphism).

```{exercise}
Explain the keyword `interface`?
```

```{exercise}
What is the difference between a class and an interface?
```

```{exercise}
Does an interface define a compile-time type, a run-time type, or both?
What does this mean?
```

```{exercise}
:label: ex:interfaces
1. Define your own interface.
2. Write a class that implements that interface.
3. Declare a variable whose compile-time type is your interface, and whose run-time type is your class.
```

## Implementing multiple interfaces

Before we move on we should mention that you can implement multiple interfaces by simply separating them with commas.
Let's say that we want to split our previous interface into the two interfaces `IPositionable` and `ITranslatable`.

```csharp
interface IPositionable
{
  int X { get; set; }
  int Y { get; set; }
}

interface ITranslatable
{
  void Translate (int x, int y);
}
```

Given that we leave our definition of `Coordinate` intact we can now declare our class an implementation of any combination of these three interfaces.
The following lines are all therefore examples of valid class declarations.

```csharp
class Coordinate : IPositionable, ITranslatable { /* ... */ }
class Coordinate : IPositionable, ITranslatable, ICoordinate { /* ... */ }
```

## UML class diagram notation

In UML class diagram notation, interface implementation is called "realization" and is depicted using a dashed line with a hollow arrow head.
The arrow points from the implementation to the interface.

%% TODO REPLACE IMAGE!!
%```{figure} https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/93/Uml_classes_en.svg/800px-Uml_classes_en.svg.png
%:name: fig:uml-class-diagram-realization
%:width: 300
%
%In UML class diagram notation, interface implementation is called "realization" and is depicted using a dashed line with a hollow arrow head.
%The arrow points from the implementation to the interface.
%[[Image source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Class_diagram)].
%```

```{exercise}
Draw a UML class diagram of the program that you built in {numref}`ex:interfaces`.
```

Commit message:

Split generics chapter into multiple chapters. Write first on generics and second on type parameters. Lots of todos and other minor things.

chapters/interfaces.md, after:

(interfaces)=
# Interfaces

The word "interface" is, in object oriented programming commonly used to mean two different but related things.

1. A contract or an abstraction.
2. A data type declared using the keyword `interface` present in many object oriented languages.

In this chapter we'll make a distinction between these two by either saying "interface" or `interface`.
Let's start with the abstract idea of an interface.
What is an interface?

%## The idea

```{important}
An interface defines *what* something can do without defining *how* it does it.[^defaults]
```

% TODO: Interface default implementations:
[^defaults]: Since C# 8.0, it is possible to define "default implementations" in interfaces which means that it now actually is possible to define the "how" in an interface. This chapter will soon be updated with more on this topic.

Remember how we've learned that a [class](classes) consists of a bunch of instance and static members?
Members are either methods or variables.
Then we have [properties](properties) which can be thought of somewhere in between methods and variables.

The set of all [public](access-modifiers) [instance members](classes) of a class are part of what we call the "interface" of a class.
An interface is a "contract" that tells us what we can do with something.
In other words, the set of all public members define *what* we can do with objects of the class.

Think of it like a standard.
If you've got a thing that adheres to some standard then you know how you can use that thing even if you don't know how the thing works "inside".
A power plug can be plugged into an outlet if they share the same standard.
We don't have to understand voltage, wattage, and amperage in order to use it.

If we've got an object and all we know is its interface then we know what methods we can call and what types to expect in return.
We know what variables we can access and what types they have.


## Motivation

Why is this a good idea?
What's the point?
Let's use an analogy.
Think about screws, bolts, and screwdrivers.
The drive type of the screw or bolt determines what screwdriver you need to screw or unscrew it.
The same screwdriver can however be used to drive a wide number of different types of screws and bolts.
Some fit into nuts, some are intended to penetrate material.
Some are left-handed and some are right-handed.
The same screwdriver can be used since different types of screws and bolts share the same drive type.

The drive type is what we would refer to as the "interface".
Think of it as a "standard".
It is the contract between the screw and the screwdriver.
Screw manufacturers make sure that their screw heads adhere to a standardized drive type.
Similarly, screwdriver manufacturers make sure that their screwdrivers adhere to a standardized drive type.

%```{figure} ../images/screws-nuts-and-screwdrivers.jpg
%:name: fig:screws-nuts-and-screwdrivers
%
%TODO.
%https://cribmode.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/screw-chart-jan042022-768x396.jpg.webp
%```

This separation between interface and implementation has immense benefits.
For one we don't have to buy a new screwdriver every time we buy a new screw.
In programming we refer to this as [reusability](reusability).
But also, it means that we don't have to coordinate between screw manufacturers, bolt manufacturers, and screwdrive manufacturers.
In programming we refer to this as [modifiability](modifiability).
We'll talk more about both reusability and modifiability in the chapter on [maintainability](maintainability).

%This is what we, in the chapter on maintainability, will refer to as "[reusability](reusability)".
%This is what we, in the chapter on maintainability, will refer to as "[modifiability](modifiability)".

```{exercise}
What is the abstract idea of an interface?
Come up with your own example in natural language that's different from the example given in this chapter on screws, bolts, and screwdrivers.
```


## Declaring an interface

An interface is often referred to as an "abstraction" while classes, in contrast, are referred to as "concretions".
Classes are concrete in the sense that they can be instantiated into objects.
Interfaces can however *not* be instantiated.

```{important}
A class defines a compile-time and a run-time type.
Interfaces *only define compile-time types* and cannot be instantiated.
```

In other words, an interface is only a compile-time type.
At run-time, any interface must be replaced by a run-time type.
Consider for example the following definition of a class called `Coordinate`:

```csharp
class Coordinate
{
  public int X { get; set; }
  public int Y { get; set; }

  public Coordinate (int x, int y)
  {
    X = x;
    Y = y;
  }

  public void Add (Coordinate coord)
  {
    X += coord.X;
  }

  public void Translate (int x, int y)
  {
    X += x;
    Y += y;
  }
}
```

What is the interface of the class `Coordinate`?
Well there are three public instance members:

1. The property `int X`.
2. The property `int Y`.
3. The instance method `void Translate (int x, int y)`.

These public instance members are what we would call the "interface" of the class.


%## The keyword

Even though we can talk about the abstract idea of the interface of the class `Coordinate`, we cannot talk about any concrete `interface` since it doesn't implement one.
What would a concrete `interface` that captures the same idea look like?
How about this:

```csharp
interface ICoordinate
{
  int X { get; set; }
  int Y { get; set; }
  void Translate (int x, int y);
}
```

```{note}
In C# the letter `I` is often prepended to the name of an interface.
So instead of naming an interface `Collection` we would name it `ICollection`.
This is purely a convention and serves no technical purpose.
Choose whether you want to stick to this convention or not and then stick to your decision within a code base.
```

Remember how we said that interfaces only define compile-time types and hence cannot be instantiated.
If we try to instantiate an interface we get an error.

```csharp
ICoordinate coord = new ICoordinate();
```

```output
error CS0144: Cannot create an instance of the abstract type or interface.
```

However, since interfaces do define compile-time types it is only the right-hand side of the assignment statement above that's problematic.
The left-hand side is entirely fine.
We can declare a variable of type `ICoordinate` and our code will compile just fine.

```csharp
ICoordinate coord;
```

```output
Build succeeded.
```

## Implementing an interface

But wait a minute you might say.
If I can declare a variable to be of type `ICoordinate` but there are no instances of `ICoordinate` how could this possibly be useful?
What can I put inside the variable?
Glad you asked.
We have now arrived at the magical destination know as [subtype polymorphism](subtype-polymorphism).
But let's finish up our discussion on interfaces before we dig too deep in that idea.

We cannot instantiate an `interface`, but we can declare that some concrete class or [abstract class](inheritance) (more on this later) *implements the interface*.
The key word here is "implements".
We say that some type implements some interface.

```{important}
A single type can implement multiple interfaces and the same interface can be implemented by multiple types.
```

To declare that a class implements an interface we use the colon (`:`) symbol after the name of the class in the class declaration and then specify the name of the interface.
When we compile our program the compiler will check whether our types actually implement all the members of the interfaces that they claim to implement.

In the example below we're defining an empty class called `Point` and claim that it implements the interface `ICoordinate`.
When compiling the program we get an error that states that we haven't implemented any of the members that `ICoordinate` demands.

```csharp
class Point : ICoordinate { }
```

```output
error CS0535: 'Point' does not implement interface member 'ICoordinate.X'.
error CS0535: 'Point' does not implement interface member 'ICoordinate.Y'.
error CS0535: 'Point' does not implement interface member 'ICoordinate.Translate(int, int)'.
```

But what about our previous class `Coordinate`.
Since we modeled the interface after that class, surely that class should be a valid implementation of `ICoordinate`.
Let's try it out.

```csharp
class Coordinate : ICoordinate
{
  // Insert same implementation as before...
}
```

```output
Build succeeded.
```

Yup, since the class `Coordinate` implements all the required members of the interface `ICoordinate` it is a valid implementation of it.
This means that we can now declare a variable with the compile-time type `ICoordinate` and run-time type `Coordinate` since the latter implements the interface of the former.

```csharp
ICoordinate coord = new Coordinate(0, 0);
```

Notice how the compile-time type on the left is an interface (or generally: an abstraction) while the run-time type on the right is a concrete class.
Why this is useful and what we can do with this is something that we'll deal with in the chapter on [subtype polymorphism](subtype-polymorphism).

```{exercise}
Explain the keyword `interface`?
```

```{exercise}
What is the difference between a class and an interface?
```

```{exercise}
Does an interface define a compile-time type, a run-time type, or both?
What does this mean?
```

```{exercise}
:label: ex:interfaces
1. Define your own interface.
2. Write a class that implements that interface.
3. Declare a variable whose compile-time type is your interface, and whose run-time type is your class.
```

## Implementing multiple interfaces

Before we move on we should mention that you can implement multiple interfaces by simply separating them with commas.
Let's say that we want to split our previous interface into the two interfaces `IPositionable` and `ITranslatable`.

```csharp
interface IPositionable
{
  int X { get; set; }
  int Y { get; set; }
}

interface ITranslatable
{
  void Translate (int x, int y);
}
```

Given that we leave our definition of `Coordinate` intact we can now declare our class an implementation of any combination of these three interfaces.
The following lines are all therefore examples of valid class declarations.

```csharp
class Coordinate : IPositionable, ITranslatable { /* ... */ }
class Coordinate : IPositionable, ITranslatable, ICoordinate { /* ... */ }
```

## UML class diagram notation

In UML class diagram notation, interface implementation is called "realization" and is depicted using a dashed line with a hollow arrow head.
The arrow points from the implementation to the interface.

%% TODO REPLACE IMAGE!!
%```{figure} https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/93/Uml_classes_en.svg/800px-Uml_classes_en.svg.png
%:name: fig:uml-class-diagram-realization
%:width: 300
%
%In UML class diagram notation, interface implementation is called "realization" and is depicted using a dashed line with a hollow arrow head.
%The arrow points from the implementation to the interface.
%[[Image source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Class_diagram)].
%```

```{exercise}
Draw a UML class diagram of the program that you built in {numref}`ex:interfaces`.
```
