chapters/statements.md, before:

(statements)=
# Statements

```{warning}
Work in progress.
```

%- https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/tour-of-csharp/program-building-blocks#statements
%- Declaration statements
%- Assignment statements
%  - What is this? Can only find single instance in documentation.
%  - https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/programming-guide/statements-expressions-operators/statements
%  - Expression statements $>$ Assignment statements
%  - Expression statements
%    - https://www.codeproject.com/Questions/5318889/Is-the-following-code-an-expression-statement
%    - https://stackoverflow.com/questions/3807192/why-do-assignment-statements-return-a-value
%    - https://www.programiz.com/csharp-programming/expressions-statements-blocks
%    - Difference between expression and expression statement is the semicolon. I.e. a standalone expression is a statement expression.
%  - Assignment statements are expression statements. See ANTLR definition:
%    - https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/language-specification/statements#127-expression-statements
%- Selection statements
%- Iteration statements
%- Mention that there are more types such as
%  - Jump statements
%  - Await and yield
%- Top-level-statements

Commit message:

Add multiple chapters on different operators.

chapters/statements.md, after:

(statements)=
# Statements

```{warning}
Work in progress.
```


%In this chapter, we'll tie together everything we've learned about expressions and operators to look at statements, the building blocks of our programs.

%- https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/tour-of-csharp/program-building-blocks#statements
%- Declaration statements
%- Assignment statements
%  - What is this? Can only find single instance in documentation.
%  - https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/programming-guide/statements-expressions-operators/statements
%  - Expression statements $>$ Assignment statements
%  - Expression statements
%    - https://www.codeproject.com/Questions/5318889/Is-the-following-code-an-expression-statement
%    - https://stackoverflow.com/questions/3807192/why-do-assignment-statements-return-a-value
%    - https://www.programiz.com/csharp-programming/expressions-statements-blocks
%    - Difference between expression and expression statement is the semicolon. I.e. a standalone expression is a statement expression.
%  - Assignment statements are expression statements. See ANTLR definition:
%    - https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/language-specification/statements#127-expression-statements
%- Selection statements
%- Iteration statements
%- Mention that there are more types such as
%  - Jump statements
%  - Await and yield
%- Top-level-statements
