chapters/variant-generic-interfaces.md, before:

---
jupytext:
  formats: md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
kernelspec:
  display_name: csharp
  language: .net-csharp
  name: .net-csharp
---

# Variant generic interfaces

```{warning}
Work in progress.
```

## Examples


### Predicates

What's an example of something that could be contravariant?
How about predicates?

```{code-cell} csharp
interface IPredicate<in T> // Contravariant!
{
  bool Check (T input);
}
```

Let's say that we have a subtyping hierarchy where `Rectangle` is a subtype of the interface `IShape`.

```{code-cell} csharp
interface IShape
{
  public double Area ();
}

class Rectangle : IShape
{
  int width, height;
  public Rectangle (int width, int height)
  {
    this.width = width;
    this.height = height;
  }
  public double Area () => width * height;
}
```

Let us then define a predicate that works on objects of type `Shape`.

```{code-cell} csharp
class LargerThan : IPredicate<IShape>
{
  double lim;
  public LargerThan (double lim) => this.lim = lim;
  public bool Check (IShape shape) => shape.Area() > lim;
}
```

Since the type parameter in `IPredicate` is contravariant we can now use values of type `IPredicate<IShape>` where values of type `IPredicate<Rectangle>` are expected.

```{code-cell} csharp
IPredicate<IShape> shapePredicate = new LargerThan(2);
IPredicate<Rectangle> p = shapePredicate; // Needs contravariance.
```

Without `T` marked as covariant we would get the following error:

```{code-cell} csharp
:tags: [hide-input, raises-exception]
interface IPredicate<T>
{
  bool Check (T input);
}

interface IShape
{
  public double Area ();
}

class Rectangle : IShape
{
  int width, height;
  public Rectangle (int width, int height)
  {
    this.width = width;
    this.height = height;
  }
  public double Area () => width * height;
}

class LargerThan : IPredicate<IShape>
{
  double lim;
  public LargerThan (double lim) => this.lim = lim;
  public bool Check (IShape shape) => shape.Area() > lim;
}

IPredicate<IShape> shapePredicate = new LargerThan(2);
IPredicate<Rectangle> p = shapePredicate; // Needs contravariance.
```


%``{code-cell} csharp
%//class ConditionalCipher<T> : ICipher<T,T>
%//{
%//  ICipher<T,T> cipher;
%//  IPredicate<T> predicate;
%//  public ConditionalCipher (ICipher<T,T> cipher, IPredicate<T> predicate)
%//  {
%//    this.cipher = cipher;
%//    this.predicate = predicate;
%//  }
%//
%//  public T Encode (T input)
%//  {
%//    if (predicate.Check(input))
%//      return cipher.Encode(input);
%//    else
%//      return input;
%//  }
%//}
%``



### Cipher factories

Let's look at a contravariant example that can be used in the context of our ciphers.
Let's model a type that can spit out any number of objects of another type.
You can think of this as a [factory](factory-method-pattern), a stream, a sequence, an infinite list, or an [iterator](iterator-pattern).

```{code-cell} csharp
interface IFactory<out T>
{
  T Next ();
  IEnumerable<T> Take (int n);
}
```

The method `Next` returns the next element in the sequence.
The method `Take` returns the `n` number of next elements in the sequence wrapped in an `IEnumerable` which you can think of as a read-only collection.
You can read more about `IEnumerable` in a [later chapter](ienumerable).

Let's first define an abstract factory that other factories can inherit from so that we won't have to reimplement the `Take` method for all factories.

```{code-cell} csharp
abstract class Factory<T> : IFactory<T>
{
  public abstract T Next();
  public IEnumerable<T> Take (int n)
  {
    List<T> result = new List<T>();
    for (int i=0; i<n; i++)
      result.Add(Next());
    return result;
  }
}
```

Our old trusted friend `CaesarCipher` remains the same, except that we've now also exposed the `steps` parameter as a property that publicly can be read and privately set.

```{code-cell} csharp
:tags: [hide-input]
interface ICipher<TIn, TOut>
{
  TOut Encode (TIn input);
}

class CaesarCipher : ICipher<char,char>
{
  public int Steps { get; private set; }

  public CaesarCipher (int Steps)
    => this.Steps = Steps;

  public char Encode (char input)
  {
    string alphabet = "ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVXYZ";
    int i = alphabet.IndexOf(Char.ToUpper(input));
    int newIndex = (i + Steps) % alphabet.Length;
    if (i != -1)
    {
      if (newIndex < 0)
        newIndex += alphabet.Length;

      if (Char.IsLower(input))
        return Char.ToLower(alphabet[newIndex]);
      else
        return alphabet[newIndex];
    }
    return input;
  }
}
```

Let's now build two factories that yield instances of `CaesarCipher`.
The first cipher that the factories generate will have `Steps` set to `0`.
Upon every subsequent generation of a new factory, the factories will either increment or decrement the counter used to determine what number of `Steps` the next cipher will be instantiated with.

```{code-cell} csharp
class IncrementingCaesarCipherFactory : Factory<CaesarCipher>
{
  int i = 0;
  public override CaesarCipher Next () => new CaesarCipher(i++);
}

class DecrementingCaesarCipherFactory : Factory<CaesarCipher>
{
  int i = 0;
  public override CaesarCipher Next () => new CaesarCipher(i--);
}
```

So what can we do with this?
Well, since `T` in the factory interface is covariant, we can assign a typed as a factory that generates subtypes to a variable typed as a factory that generates the supertype.

```{code-cell}
IFactory<CaesarCipher> caesarFactory = new IncrementingCaesarCipherFactory();
IFactory<ICipher<char,char>> charFactory = caesarFactory; // Needs covariance.
```

Why would this be useful?
Well, sometimes we want to be able to treat a variable as its specific type, and sometimes we want to treat it as its general type.

In the example below, we have two methods that take factories of different type.
Since `T` in the factory interface is covariant we can pass the value of type `IFactory<CaesarCipher>` to both methods even though one of them excepts a value of type `IFactory<ICipher<char,char>>`.
Why?
Because a supertype of `CaesarCipher` is `ICipher<char,char>` and the type parameter where we apply this type is covariant.

```{code-cell} csharp
string encodeAny (int n, IFactory<ICipher<char,char>> factory) {
  string output = "";
  foreach (ICipher<char,char> cipher in factory.Take(n))
    output += cipher.Encode('A');
  return output;
}

string encodeCaesar (int n, IFactory<CaesarCipher> factory) {
  string output = "";
  foreach (CaesarCipher cipher in factory.Take(n))
    output += $"{cipher.Steps}=>{cipher.Encode('A')} ";
  return output;
}

IFactory<CaesarCipher> factory = new IncrementingCaesarCipherFactory();

Console.WriteLine(encodeAny(5, factory));
Console.WriteLine(encodeCaesar(5, factory)); // Needs covariance.
```




% Example of variance could be the Predicate interface from an exercise in the chapter on [abstract inject object composition](abstract-injected-object-composition:exercises:predicates). The variant type is always fed in, but never out.

%% Pick up on ICipher with two arguments from generic-types chapter. This is a great example because one type is strictly in and one type is strictly out.
%%```csharp
%%interface ICipher<in TIn, out TOut>
%%{
%%  public TOut Encode (TIn input);
%%}
%%```
%
%
%
%%```csharp
%%Derived d = new Derived();
%%Base b = new Base();
%%
%%// Example 1
%%IBox<Derived> derivedBox = new Box<Derived>(d);
%%IBox<Base> baseBox = derivedBox;
%%
%%// Example 2
%%IBox<Base> box = new Box<Derived>(d);
%%
%%// Example 3 (regular polymorphism to contrast, this is not the thing)
%%IBox<Base> different = new Box<Base>(d);
%%
%%
%%class Base {}
%%class Derived : Base {}
%%
%%interface IBox<out T>
%%{
%%  T Get ();
%%}
%%
%%class Box<T> : IBox<T>
%%{
%%  T x;
%%  // Constructor can still take T as input even thought IBox is covariant. Because constructors are not polymorphic and dynamically dispatched. Constructors are like static methods. Whenever we run them we know exactly what type we have.
%%  public Box (T x) => this.x = x;
%%  public T Get () => x;
%%}
%%```

Commit message:

Add basic exercises to Variant generic interfaces.

chapters/variant-generic-interfaces.md, after:

---
jupytext:
  formats: md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
kernelspec:
  display_name: csharp
  language: .net-csharp
  name: .net-csharp
---

# Variant generic interfaces

```{warning}
Work in progress.
```

## Examples


### Predicates

What's an example of something that could be contravariant?
How about predicates?

```{code-cell} csharp
interface IPredicate<in T> // Contravariant!
{
  bool Check (T input);
}
```

Let's say that we have a subtyping hierarchy where `Rectangle` is a subtype of the interface `IShape`.

```{code-cell} csharp
interface IShape
{
  public double Area ();
}

class Rectangle : IShape
{
  int width, height;
  public Rectangle (int width, int height)
  {
    this.width = width;
    this.height = height;
  }
  public double Area () => width * height;
}
```

Let us then define a predicate that works on objects of type `Shape`.

```{code-cell} csharp
class LargerThan : IPredicate<IShape>
{
  double lim;
  public LargerThan (double lim) => this.lim = lim;
  public bool Check (IShape shape) => shape.Area() > lim;
}
```

Since the type parameter in `IPredicate` is contravariant we can now use values of type `IPredicate<IShape>` where values of type `IPredicate<Rectangle>` are expected.

```{code-cell} csharp
IPredicate<IShape> shapePredicate = new LargerThan(2);
IPredicate<Rectangle> p = shapePredicate; // Needs contravariance.
```

Without `T` marked as covariant we would get the following error:

```{code-cell} csharp
:tags: [hide-input, raises-exception]
interface IPredicate<T>
{
  bool Check (T input);
}

interface IShape
{
  public double Area ();
}

class Rectangle : IShape
{
  int width, height;
  public Rectangle (int width, int height)
  {
    this.width = width;
    this.height = height;
  }
  public double Area () => width * height;
}

class LargerThan : IPredicate<IShape>
{
  double lim;
  public LargerThan (double lim) => this.lim = lim;
  public bool Check (IShape shape) => shape.Area() > lim;
}

IPredicate<IShape> shapePredicate = new LargerThan(2);
IPredicate<Rectangle> p = shapePredicate; // Needs contravariance.
```


%``{code-cell} csharp
%//class ConditionalCipher<T> : ICipher<T,T>
%//{
%//  ICipher<T,T> cipher;
%//  IPredicate<T> predicate;
%//  public ConditionalCipher (ICipher<T,T> cipher, IPredicate<T> predicate)
%//  {
%//    this.cipher = cipher;
%//    this.predicate = predicate;
%//  }
%//
%//  public T Encode (T input)
%//  {
%//    if (predicate.Check(input))
%//      return cipher.Encode(input);
%//    else
%//      return input;
%//  }
%//}
%``



### Cipher factories

Let's look at a contravariant example that can be used in the context of our ciphers.
Let's model a type that can spit out any number of objects of another type.
You can think of this as a [factory](factory-method-pattern), a stream, a sequence, an infinite list, or an [iterator](iterator-pattern).

```{code-cell} csharp
interface IFactory<out T>
{
  T Next ();
  IEnumerable<T> Take (int n);
}
```

The method `Next` returns the next element in the sequence.
The method `Take` returns the `n` number of next elements in the sequence wrapped in an `IEnumerable` which you can think of as a read-only collection.
You can read more about `IEnumerable` in a [later chapter](ienumerable).

Let's first define an abstract factory that other factories can inherit from so that we won't have to reimplement the `Take` method for all factories.

```{code-cell} csharp
abstract class Factory<T> : IFactory<T>
{
  public abstract T Next();
  public IEnumerable<T> Take (int n)
  {
    List<T> result = new List<T>();
    for (int i=0; i<n; i++)
      result.Add(Next());
    return result;
  }
}
```

Our old trusted friend `CaesarCipher` remains the same, except that we've now also exposed the `steps` parameter as a property that publicly can be read and privately set.

```{code-cell} csharp
:tags: [hide-input]
interface ICipher<TIn, TOut>
{
  TOut Encode (TIn input);
}

class CaesarCipher : ICipher<char,char>
{
  public int Steps { get; private set; }

  public CaesarCipher (int Steps)
    => this.Steps = Steps;

  public char Encode (char input)
  {
    string alphabet = "ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVXYZ";
    int i = alphabet.IndexOf(Char.ToUpper(input));
    int newIndex = (i + Steps) % alphabet.Length;
    if (i != -1)
    {
      if (newIndex < 0)
        newIndex += alphabet.Length;

      if (Char.IsLower(input))
        return Char.ToLower(alphabet[newIndex]);
      else
        return alphabet[newIndex];
    }
    return input;
  }
}
```

Let's now build two factories that yield instances of `CaesarCipher`.
The first cipher that the factories generate will have `Steps` set to `0`.
Upon every subsequent generation of a new factory, the factories will either increment or decrement the counter used to determine what number of `Steps` the next cipher will be instantiated with.

```{code-cell} csharp
class IncrementingCaesarCipherFactory : Factory<CaesarCipher>
{
  int i = 0;
  public override CaesarCipher Next () => new CaesarCipher(i++);
}

class DecrementingCaesarCipherFactory : Factory<CaesarCipher>
{
  int i = 0;
  public override CaesarCipher Next () => new CaesarCipher(i--);
}
```

So what can we do with this?
Well, since `T` in the factory interface is covariant, we can assign a typed as a factory that generates subtypes to a variable typed as a factory that generates the supertype.

```{code-cell}
IFactory<CaesarCipher> caesarFactory = new IncrementingCaesarCipherFactory();
IFactory<ICipher<char,char>> charFactory = caesarFactory; // Needs covariance.
```

Why would this be useful?
Well, sometimes we want to be able to treat a variable as its specific type, and sometimes we want to treat it as its general type.

In the example below, we have two methods that take factories of different type.
Since `T` in the factory interface is covariant we can pass the value of type `IFactory<CaesarCipher>` to both methods even though one of them excepts a value of type `IFactory<ICipher<char,char>>`.
Why?
Because a supertype of `CaesarCipher` is `ICipher<char,char>` and the type parameter where we apply this type is covariant.

```{code-cell} csharp
string encodeAny (int n, IFactory<ICipher<char,char>> factory) {
  string output = "";
  foreach (ICipher<char,char> cipher in factory.Take(n))
    output += cipher.Encode('A');
  return output;
}

string encodeCaesar (int n, IFactory<CaesarCipher> factory) {
  string output = "";
  foreach (CaesarCipher cipher in factory.Take(n))
    output += $"{cipher.Steps}=>{cipher.Encode('A')} ";
  return output;
}

IFactory<CaesarCipher> factory = new IncrementingCaesarCipherFactory();

Console.WriteLine(encodeAny(5, factory));
Console.WriteLine(encodeCaesar(5, factory)); // Needs covariance.
```


## Exercises

```{exercise}
In the chapter on [generic types](generic-types:icipher) we introduced the generic interface `ICipher<TIn,TOut>`.
Both type parameters in this generic type *can* be variant.
Explain why this in your own words and write a new version of `ICipher` where the type parameters are variant.
```

```{exercise}
Come up with and implement your own example of an interface with a type parameter that usefully exhibits covariance.
Give an example in code where you are using the fact that the type parameter is covariant.
```

```{exercise}
Come up with and implement your own example of an interface with a type parameter that usefully exhibits contravariance.
Give an example in code where you are using the fact that the type parameter is covariant.
```



% Example of variance could be the Predicate interface from an exercise in the chapter on [abstract inject object composition](abstract-injected-object-composition:exercises:predicates). The variant type is always fed in, but never out.

%% Pick up on ICipher with two arguments from generic-types chapter. This is a great example because one type is strictly in and one type is strictly out.
%%```csharp
%%interface ICipher<in TIn, out TOut>
%%{
%%  public TOut Encode (TIn input);
%%}
%%```
%
%
%
%%```csharp
%%Derived d = new Derived();
%%Base b = new Base();
%%
%%// Example 1
%%IBox<Derived> derivedBox = new Box<Derived>(d);
%%IBox<Base> baseBox = derivedBox;
%%
%%// Example 2
%%IBox<Base> box = new Box<Derived>(d);
%%
%%// Example 3 (regular polymorphism to contrast, this is not the thing)
%%IBox<Base> different = new Box<Base>(d);
%%
%%
%%class Base {}
%%class Derived : Base {}
%%
%%interface IBox<out T>
%%{
%%  T Get ();
%%}
%%
%%class Box<T> : IBox<T>
%%{
%%  T x;
%%  // Constructor can still take T as input even thought IBox is covariant. Because constructors are not polymorphic and dynamically dispatched. Constructors are like static methods. Whenever we run them we know exactly what type we have.
%%  public Box (T x) => this.x = x;
%%  public T Get () => x;
%%}
%%```
